{'test_note1': [['venerable', 'countenance', 'ubiquity', 'squalid', 'confluence', 'congruent', 'credulity', 'callousness', 'subversive', 'disruptive', 'promontory', 'equivocal', 'refulgence', 'deliberation', 'expedient', 'soubriquet', 'obduracy', 'swingeing', 'sombre', 'baneful', 'vaunt', 'totter', 'magnanimity', 'countenance', 'fathom', 'solicitude', 'obdurate', 'lapidary', 'solemn', 'benignant', 'prurient', 'capriciously', 'inscrutability', 'momentous', 'repudiate', 'obduracy', 'risible', 'Sacrilege', 'daunted', 'Recalcitrant', 'fraught', 'contumacy', 'succour', 'ascetics', 'quixotic', 'abjection', 'excoriation', 'destitute', 'seditious', 'appurtenance', 'opaque', 'sinew', 'pernicious', 'venerable', 'clemency', 'punctiliously', 'conjecture', 'fissile', 'pestiferous', 'fortitude', 'hitherto', 'confer', 'abdicate', 'insurrection', 'concordat', 'conceit', 'adulation', 'scullery', 'edifice', 'penury', 'indignation', 'despoliation', 'bulwark', 'extirpation', 'emollient', 'proscribe', 'bequeath', 'prevarication', 'rout', 'tutelary', 'pedigree', 'continence', 'expectoration', 'w frippery', 'edifice', 'febrile', 'adulatory', 'recant', 'gaunt', 'vituperative', 'vituperation', 'pulpit', 'succour', 'oscillation', 'contemptuous', 'acquiesce', 'licit', 'heath', 'admonition', 'Scorn', 'inveterate', 'complacency', 'coterie', 'imposture', 'plenipotentiary', 'titillation', 'emancipation', 'acquiesce', 'sumptuous', 'infidel', 'buttress', 'grievous', 'pauper', 'haver', 'inexorable', 'outstrip', 'pugnacious', 'assiduity', 'sonorous', 'excoriate', 'w proclivity', 'avarice', 'putrefaction', 'Precocious', 'genteel', 'dosshouse', 'chaff', 'imprimatur', 'tribulation', 'perdition', 'pestilence', 'overt', 'pecuniary', 'upbraid', 'supercilious', 'tumult', 'apostate', 'acolyte', 'penance', 'perforce', 'mawkish'], [], ['Julian, in committing himself to this programme of welfare, took for granted that Cybele would approve. Caring for the weak and unfortunate, so the emperor insisted, had always been a prime concern of the gods. If only the Galatians could be brought to appreciate this, then they might be brought as well to renew their ancient habits of worship. ‘Teach them that doing good works was our practice of old.’', 'An assertion that would no doubt have come as news to the celebrants of Cybele themselves. Behind the selfless ascetics of Julian’s fantasies there lurked an altogether less sober reality: priests whose enthusiasms had run not to charity, but to dancing, and cross-dressing, and self-castration. The gods cared nothing for the poor. To think otherwise was ‘airhead talk’.4 When Julian, writing to the high priest of Galatia, quoted Homer on the laws of hospitality, and how even beggars might appeal to them, he was merely drawing attention to the scale of his delusion. The heroes of the Iliad, favourites of the gods, golden and predatory, had scorned the weak and downtrodden. So too, for all the honour that Julian paid them, had philosophers. The starving deserved no sympathy. Beggars were best rounded up and deported. Pity risked undermining a wise man’s self-control. Only fellow citizens of good character who, through no fault of their own, had fallen on evil days might conceivably merit assistance. Certainly, there was little in the character of the gods whom Julian so adored, or in the teachings of the philosophers whom he so admired, to justify any assumption that the poor, just by virtue of their poverty, had a right to aid. The young emperor, sincere though he was in his hatred of ‘Galilean’ teachings, and in regretting their impact upon all that he held most dear, was blind to the irony of his plan for combating them: that it was itself irredeemably Christian.', 'Brothels were full of women who, as infants, had been abandoned by their parents – so much so that it had long provided novelists with a staple of their fiction.', 'in', 's', 'The Nazis, certainly, knew as much – which is why, in today’s demonology, they retain their starring role. Communist dictators may have been no less murderous than fascist ones; but they – because communism was the expression of a concern for the oppressed masses – rarely seem as diabolical to people today. The measure of how Christian we as a society remain is that mass murder precipitated by racism tends to be seen as vastly more abhorrent than mass murder precipitated by an ambition to usher in a classless paradise. Liberals may not believe in hell; but they still believe in evil.']],'test_note2': [['falteringly', 'robust', 'amenable', 'quantitative', 'Qualitative', 'precipice', 'succinct', 'prudence', 'perseverance', 'clamoring', 'constituency', 'surmountable', 'acute', 'saturate', 'provenance', 'eminent', 'insulation', 'cede', 'placate', 'prudence', 'rigorous', 'tentative', 'rapacity', 'sacrosanct', 'unilateral', 'yield', 'ostensibly', 'poultry', 'stochastic', 'exacerbate'], [['We look at risks that threaten not regional collapse, or endurable hardship, but the final undoing of the human enterprise.'], ['“Most of the people who are going to die in the greatest cataclysm in the history of man have already been born.”'], ['Perhaps one could say that we were heading toward Russian roulette with two bullets in the gun, but that I think we will remove one of these before it’s time to pull the trigger. And there might just be time to remove the last one too, if we really try.'], ['Despair is a self-fulfilling prophecy.'], ['Consider, for example, how little we know of how ultraviolet light looks to a finch; of how echolocation feels to a bat, or a dolphin; of the way that a red fox, or a homing pigeon, experiences the Earth’s magnetic field. Such uncharted experiences exist in minds much less sophisticated than our own. What experiences, possibly of immense value, could be accessible, then, to minds much greater? Mice know very little of music, art or humor. Toward what experiences are we as mice? What beauties are we blind to?']], ['But it follows that while our choices can lock things in, closing off possibilities, they can’t open up new ones.', 'There are many utterly terrible outcomes that do not count as existential catastrophes. One way this could happen is if there were no single precipitous event, but a multitude of smaller failures. This is because I take on the usual sense of catastrophe as a single, decisive event, rather than any combination of events that is bad in sum.', 'Alternatively, there might be a single catastrophe, but one that leaves open some way for humanity to eventually recover. From our own vantage, looking out to the next few generations, this may appear equally bleak. But a thousand years hence it may be considered just one of several dark episodes in the human story. A true existential catastrophe must by its very nature be the decisive moment of human history—the point where we failed.', 'Both wars kill billions of humans; but the second war kills humanity. Both wars destroy our present; but the second war destroys our future.', 'The procession of generations that extends onwards from our present leads far, far beyond the line of our sight, and, compared with these stretches of human time, which exceed the whole history of the earth up to now, our brief civilized moment is almost infinitesimal. Yet we threaten, in the name of our transient aims and fallible convictions, to foreclose it all. If our species does destroy itself, it will be a death in the cradle—a case of infant mortality.', 'If our species does destroy itself, it will be a death in the cradle—a case of infant mortality.', 'While it is difficult to precisely measure global spending on existential risk, we can state with confidence that humanity spends more on ice cream every year than on ensuring that the technologies we develop do not destroy us.', 'When air quality is improved, the benefit doesn’t go to a particular individual, but is shared by everyone in the community. And when I benefit from cleaner air, that doesn’t diminish the benefit you get from it. Things with these two properties are called public goods and markets have trouble supplying them.', 'Protection from existential risk is a public good: protection would benefit us all and my protection doesn’t come at the expense of yours. So we’d expect existential risk to be neglected by the market.', 'but it contains less than 1 percent of all the people alive today. If it acts alone on an existential risk, it bears the full cost of the policy, yet only reaps a hundredth of the benefit. In other words, even if it had a well-informed government acting in the longterm interests of its citizens, it would undervalue work on existential risk by a factor of 100. Similarly, Russia would undervalue it by a factor of 50, the United States by a factor of 20, and even China would undervalue it by a factor of five. Since such a large proportion of the benefits spill out to other countries, each nation is tempted to free-ride on the efforts of others, and some of the work that would benefit us all won’t get done. The same effect that causes this undersupply of protection causes an oversupply of risk. Since only 1 percent of the damages of existential catastrophe are borne by the people of the United Kingdom, their government is incentivized to neglect the downsides of risk-inducing policies by this same factor of 100. (The situation is even worse if individuals or small groups become able to pose existential risks.)', 'The beneficiaries are not merely global, but intergenerational—all the people who would ever live. Protection from existential risk is an intergenerational global public good . So even the entire population of the globe acting in concert could be expected to undervalue existential risks by a very large factor, leaving them greatly neglected.', 'leaving no key constituency to take ownership of the issue.', 'When I have raised the topic of existential risk with senior politicians and civil servants, I have encountered a common reaction: genuine deep concern paired with a feeling that addressing the greatest risks facing humanity was “above my pay grade,”', 'But this history shows that existential risk is capable of rousing major global concern, from the elite to the grass roots.', 'Taking this trajectory information into account, the probability of an Earth-impact in the next hundred years falls to about one in 120,000 for asteroids between one and ten kilometers, and about one in 150 million for those above ten kilometers. 17 These probabilities are immensely reassuring. While there is still real risk, it has been studied in great detail and shown to be vanishingly low. It is a famous risk, but a small one. If humanity were to go extinct in the next century, it would almost certainly be from something other than an asteroid or comet impact.', 'While uncertainties remain, the overall story here is one of humanity having its act together. It was just 12 years from the first scientific realization of the risk of global catastrophe to the point where government started taking it seriously. And now, 28 years later, almost all the large asteroids have been tracked.', 'In my view, no other existential risk is as well handled as that of asteroids and comets.', 'A willingness to think seriously about imprecise probabilities of unprecedented events is crucial to grappling with risks to humanity’s future.', 'There is very little known about how to prevent or delay an impending supereruption.', 'For now, our best approach to the threat of supereruptions lies in preparing to mitigate the damage, through building up non-perishable food reserves or developing emergency food production techniques.', 'And most importantly, the probability of a civilization-threatening catastrophe in the next century is estimated to be about 100 times that of asteroids and comets combined. So supervolcanic eruptions appear to be the greater risk, and in greater need of additional attention.', 'Much more research is needed on the climatic effects of supervolcanic eruptions to see which sizes might pose a real risk to humanity.', 'A supernova or gamma ray burst close to our Solar System could have catastrophic effects. While the gamma rays and cosmic rays themselves won’t reach the Earth’s surface, the reactions they trigger in our atmosphere may pose a threat. The most important is probably the production of nitrogen oxides that would alter the Earth’s climate and dramatically erode the ozone layer. This last effect is thought to be the most deadly, leaving us much more exposed to UV radiation for a period of years.', 'These probabilities are very small—they look to be at least 20 times smaller than those of similarly sized catastrophes from asteroids and comets and at least 3,000 times smaller than those from supervolcanic eruptions.', 'It is striking how recently many of these risks were discovered. Magnetic field reversal was discovered in 1906. Proof that Earth had been hit by a large asteroid or comet first emerged in 1960. And we had no idea gamma ray bursts even existed until 1969. For almost our entire history we have been subject to risks to which we were completely oblivious.', 'The likely incompleteness of our knowledge is a major problem for any attempt to understand the scale of natural risk by cataloging known threats.', 'The fossil record is our richest source of information about how long species like us survived, and so about the total extinction risk they faced.', 'The human race’s prospects of survival were considerably better when we were defenceless against tigers than they are today, when we have become defenceless against ourselves. —Arnold Toynbee', 'While they couldn’t prove it was safe to all the physicists’ satisfaction, they eventually decided to move on to other topics.', 'Despite the report concluding that “the complexity of the argument and the absence of satisfactory experimental foundation makes further work on the subject highly desirable,” it was taken by the leadership at Los Alamos to be the final word on the matter.', 'The bomb’s designers didn’t know whether or not igniting the atmosphere was physically possible, so at that stage it was still epistemically possible. While it turned out that there was no objective risk, there was a serious subjective risk that their bomb might destroy humanity.', 'Our destructive potential had grown so high that for the first time the question of whether we might destroy all of humanity needed to be asked—and answered. So I date the beginning of the Precipice (our age of heightened risk) to 11:29 a.m. (UTC) on July 16, 1945: the precise moment of the Trinity test.', 'It is not clear whether even a single elected representative was told about the potential risk. 14 The scientists and military appear to have assumed full responsibility for an act that threatened all life on Earth. Was this a responsibility that was theirs to assume?', 'Back at the time of the Berkeley meeting, many of the scientists were deeply afraid that Hitler might get there first and hold the world to nuclear ransom. But by the time of the Trinity test, Hitler was dead and Europe liberated. Japan was in retreat and there was no concern about losing the war. The risk was taken for the same reasons that the bombs would be dropped in Japan a month later: to shorten the war, to avoid loss of life in an invasion, to achieve more favorable surrender terms, and to warn the Soviet Union about America’s new-found might. These are not strong reasons for unilaterally risking the future of humanity.', 'When the bomb exploded, it released far more energy than anticipated. Instead of six megatons they got 15—a thousand times the energy of the Hiroshima bomb, and the biggest explosion America would ever produce.', 'Of the two major thermonuclear calculations made that summer in Berkeley, they got one right and one wrong.', 'The screens had been showing a realistic simulation of a Soviet attack from a military exercise that had mistakenly been sent to the live computer system.', 'The false alarm turned out to be caused by sunlight glinting off clouds, which looked to the Soviet satellite system like the flashes of launching rockets.', 'The false alarm had been caused by the launch of a Norwegian scientific rocket to study the northern lights. Russia had been notified, but word hadn’t reached the radar operators.', 'But we now know this would require ten times as many weapons as we currently possess.', 'For all that, nuclear winter appears unlikely to lead to our extinction. No current researchers on nuclear winter are on record saying that it would and many have explicitly said that it is unlikely.', 'most of the risk posed by nuclear weapons in the coming decades may come from this possibility of new escalations', 'So how should we think about the risk from runaway or moist greenhouse effects? The situation is akin to that of igniting the atmosphere, in that it is probably physically impossible for our actions to produce the catastrophe—but we aren’t sure.', 'And neither has been incorporated into the main IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) warming estimates, so any warming would come on top of the warming we are currently bracing for.', 'Even at such extreme levels of warming, it is difficult to see exactly how climate change could do so. Major effects of climate change include reduced agricultural yields, sea level rises, water scarcity, increased tropical diseases, ocean acidification and the collapse of the Gulf Stream. While extremely important when assessing the overall risks of climate change, none of these threaten extinction or irrevocable collapse.', 'So the most important known effect of climate change from the perspective of direct existential risk is probably the most obvious: heat stress.', 'However, our present task is identifying existential risks to humanity and it is hard to see how any realistic level of heat stress could pose such a risk.', 'A central problem with geoengineering is that the cure may be worse than the disease. For the very scale of what it is attempting to achieve could create a risk of massive unintended consequences over the entire Earth’s surface, possibly posing a greater existential risk than climate change itself.', 'In 1950, the average number of children born to each woman was 5.05. It is now just 2.47—not so far above the replacement rate of 2.1 children per woman.', 'One category of concern is resource depletion. People have suggested that humanity is running short of fossil fuels, phosphorous, topsoil, fresh water and certain metals. 102 However, these forms of resource scarcity don’t appear to pose any direct risk of destroying our potential.', 'recent review found that even if honeybees were completely lost—and all other pollinators too—this would only create a 3 to 8 percent reduction in global crop production.', 'Perhaps most importantly, we have public health bodies to facilitate global communication and coordination in the face of new outbreaks.', 'It is highly unlikely that in any particular case the enhanced pathogens would escape into the wild. But just how unlikely? Unfortunately, we don’t have good data, due to a lack of transparency about incident and escape rates.', 'But even the patchy evidence we do have includes enough confirmed cases to see that the rates of escape are worryingly high', 'tacit', 'power law distributions have a “heavy tail” of increasingly large events, where there can often be events at entirely different scales, with some being thousands, or millions, of times bigger than others. Deaths from war and terror appear to follow power laws with especially heavy tails, such that the majority of the deaths happen in the few biggest events. For instance, warfare deaths in the last hundred years are dominated by the two World Wars, and most US fatalities from terrorism occurred in the September 11 attacks. 45 When events follow a distribution like this, the average size of events until now systematically under-represents the expected size of events to come, even if the underlying risk stays the same.', 'Skeptics of the above picture sometimes quip that it relies on an AI system that is smart enough to take control of the world, yet too stupid to recognize that this isn’t what we want. 96 But that misunderstands the scenario. For in fact this sketch of AI motivation explicitly acknowledges that the system will work out that its goals are misaligned with ours—that is what would motivate it toward deceit and conflict and wresting control.', 'History already involves examples of individuals with human-level intelligence (Hitler, Stalin, Genghis Khan) scaling up from the power of an individual to a substantial fraction of all global power, as an instrumental goal to achieving what they want.', 'Such an outcome needn’t involve the extinction of humanity. But it could easily be an existential catastrophe nonetheless. Humanity would have permanently ceded its control over the future. Our future would be at the mercy of how a small number of people set up the computer system that took over.', 'The case for existential risk from AI is clearly speculative. Indeed, it is the most speculative case for a major risk in this book. Yet a speculative case that there is a large risk can be more important than a robust case for a very low-probability risk, such as that posed by asteroids.', 'half the respondents estimated that the probability of the longterm impact of AGI being “extremely bad (e.g., human extinction)” was at least 5 percent. 111 I find this last point particularly remarkable—in how many other fields would the typical leading researcher think there is a one in twenty chance the field’s ultimate goal would be extremely bad for humanity?', 'if even a small proportion of researchers don’t believe in the dangers (or welcome a world with machines in control), they will be the ones who take the final steps. This is an instance of the unilateralist’s curse', 'Losing our potential means getting locked into a bad set of futures. We can categorize existential catastrophes by looking at which aspects of our future get locked in. This could be a world without humans (extinction) or a world without civilization (unrecoverable collapse). But it could also take the form of an unrecoverable dystopia —a world with civilization intact, but locked into a terrible form, with little or no value.', 'We can divide the unrecoverable dystopias we might face into three types, on the basis of whether they are desired by the people who live in them. There are possibilities where the people don’t want that world, yet the structure of society makes it almost impossible for them to coordinate to change it. There are possibilities where the people do want that world, yet they are misguided and the world falls far short of what they could have achieved. And in between there are possibilities where only a small group wants that world but enforces it against the wishes of the rest.', 'For example, a dystopian society that lasted all the way until humanity was destroyed by external forces would be an existential catastrophe. However, if a dystopian outcome does not have this property, if it leaves open all our chances for success once it ends—it is a dark age in our story, but not a true existential catastrophe.', 'The extra-terrestrial risk that looms largest in popular culture is conflict with a spacefaring alien civilization. While it is very difficult to definitively rule this out, it is widely regarded to be extremely unlikely (though becoming more plausible over the extreme long term).', 'But perhaps more public discussion should be had before we engage in active SETI (sending powerful signals to attract the attention of distant aliens). And even passive SETI (listening for their messages) could hold dangers, as the message could be designed to entrap us.', 'Even if we restrict our attention to engineered pandemics, I think there is more existential risk than in all risks of the last two chapters combined, and those risks were already sufficient to make safeguarding humanity a central priority of our time.', 'we may have a chance of stumbling across something that offers the destructive power of the atomic bomb or a deadly pandemic, but which turns out to be easy to produce from everyday materials. Discovering even one such technology might be enough to make the continued existence of human civilization impossible.', 'In order for our time to be uniquely safe, we must have lowered natural risk by more than we have raised anthropogenic risk. But as we saw in Chapter 3, despite the sheer number of natural threats, their combined probability must have always been extremely low (or species like ours couldn’t last as long as they do). The realistic estimates for the natural existential risk per century ranged from one in 1,000,000 to one in 2,000. So there just isn’t much risk there for our technologies to reduce.', 'Existential catastrophe via : Asteroid or comet impact Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 1,000,000 Existential catastrophe via : Supervolcanic eruption Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 10,000 Existential catastrophe via : Stellar explosion Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 1,000,000,000 Existential catastrophe via : Total natural risk Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 10,000 Existential catastrophe via : Nuclear war Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 1,000 Existential catastrophe via : Climate change Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 1,000 Existential catastrophe via : Other environmental damage Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 1,000 Existential catastrophe via : “Naturally” arising pandemics Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 10,000 Existential catastrophe via : Engineered pandemics Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 30 Existential catastrophe via : Unaligned artificial intelligence Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 10 Existential catastrophe via : Unforeseen anthropogenic risks Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 30 Existential catastrophe via : Other anthropogenic risks Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 50 Existential catastrophe via : Total anthropogenic risk Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 6 Existential catastrophe via : Total existential risk Chance within next 100 years : ∼ 1 in 6', 'My best estimates for the chance of an existential catastrophe from each of these sources occurring at some point in the next 100 years (when the catastrophe has delayed effects, like climate change, I’m talking about the point of no return coming within 100 years).', 'I estimate anthropogenic risks to be more than 1,000 times more likely than natural risks.', 'And within anthropogenic risks, I estimate the risks from future technologies to be roughly 100 times larger than those of existing ones, giving a substantial escalation in risk from Chapter 3 to 4 to 5.', 'In my view, the greatest risk to humanity’s potential in the next hundred years comes from unaligned artificial intelligence', 'five big risks: those around nuclear war, climate change, other environmental damage, engineered pandemics and unaligned AI. While I see the final two as especially important, I think they all pose at least a one in 1,000 risk of destroying humanity’s potential this century, and so all warrant major global efforts on the grounds of their contribution to existential risk (in addition to the other compelling reasons).', 'Overall, I think the chance of an existential catastrophe striking humanity in the next hundred years is about one in six. This is not a small statistical probability that we must diligently bear in mind, like the chance of dying in a car crash, but something that could readily occur, like the roll of a die, or Russian roulette. This is a lot of risk, but our situation is far from hopeless. It implies a five in six chance that humanity successfully makes it through the next hundred years with our longterm potential intact. So while I think there are risks that should be central global priorities (say, those with a one in 1,000 chance or greater), I am not saying that this century will be our last.', 'I’d say there is something like a one in two chance that humanity avoids every existential catastrophe and eventually fulfills its potential: achieving something close to the best future open to us.', 'I think about a third of the existential risk over our entire future lies in this century.', 'The numbers therefore represent my actual best guesses of the chance the threats materialize, taking our responses into account.', 'So perhaps the headline number should not be the amount of risk I expect to remain, about one in six, but two in six—the difference in existential risk between a lackluster effort by humanity and a heroic one.', 'Even completely objective, precise and accurate estimates would merely measure how large the different risks are, saying nothing about how tractable they are, nor how neglected. The raw probabilities are thus insufficient for determining which risks should get the most attention, or what kind of attention they should receive.', 'Many of the things we commonly think of as social goods may turn out to also be existential security factors. Things such as education, peace or prosperity may help protect us. And many social ills may be existential risk factors. In other words, there may be explanations grounded in existential risk for pursuing familiar, common-sense agendas. But I want to stress that this is a dangerous observation. For it risks a slide into complacency, where we substitute our goal of securing our future with other goals that may be only loosely related. Just because existential risk declines as some other goal is pursued doesn’t mean that the other goal is the most effective way to secure our future.', 'diminishing returns: resources typically make a bigger difference when fewer resources have been spent so far.', 'power law distribution, where catastrophes become substantially more rare as they get larger. This means that we are more likely to get hit by a pandemic or asteroid killing a hundredth of all people before one killing a tenth, and more likely to be hit by one killing a tenth of all people before one that kills almost everyone.', 'In short, early action is higher leverage, but more easily wasted. It has more power, but less accuracy. If we do act far in advance of a threat, we should do so in ways that take advantage of this leverage, while being robust to near-sightedness.', 'considering neglectedness. In our current situation there are trillions of dollars per year flowing to broad interventions such as education, but less than a ten-thousandth this much going to targeted existential risk interventions.', 'But there will be serious diminishing returns as investment is scaled up, and it may well be that even if the world were solely interested in reducing existential risk, the total budget for targeted interventions should never exceed that for broad interventions.', 'We need to take responsibility for our future. Those of us alive right now are the only people who can fight against the present dangers; the only people who can build the communities, norms and institutions that will safeguard our future. Whether we are remembered as the generation who turned the corner to a bright and secure future, or not remembered at all, comes down to whether we rise to meet these challenges.', 'Catastrophes of this scale are unprecedented throughout our long history. This creates severe challenges for our attempts to understand, predict and prevent these disasters. And what’s more, these challenges will always be with us, for existential risks are necessarily unprecedented . By the time we have a precedent, it is too late—we’ve lost our future.', 'So if a disaster does occur, it is much more likely to be because there was an estimation mistake and the real risk was higher, rather than because a one in a trillion event occurred.', 'While nations occasionally act for the greater interest of all humankind, this is the exception rather than the rule.', 'For example, the Biological Weapons Convention could be brought into line with the Chemical Weapons Convention: taking its budget from $1.4 million up to $80 million, granting it the power to investigate suspected breaches, and increasing its staff from a mere four people to a level more appropriate for its role.', 'We’ve seen how humanity is akin to an adolescent, with rapidly developing physical abilities, lagging wisdom and self-control, little thought for its longterm future and an unhealthy appetite for risk. When it comes to our own children, we design our societies to deliberately stage their access to risky technologies: for example, preventing them from driving a car until they reach an appropriate age and pass a qualifying test. One could imagine applying a similar approach to humanity. Not relinquishing areas of technology, but accepting that in some cases we aren’t ready for them until we meet a given standard. For example, no nuclear technologies until we’ve had a hundred years without a major war. Unfortunately, there is a major challenge. Unlike the case with our own children, there are no wise adults to decide these rules. Humanity would have to lay down the rules to govern itself . And those who lack wisdom usually lack the ability to see this; those who lack patience are unlikely to delay gratification until they acquire it.', 'that the length of human survival so far puts a tight bound on the natural risk;', 'For example, scientists expect the brightening of the Sun to also slow the Earth’s plate tectonics, dampening volcanic activity. Life as we know it requires such activity; volcanoes lift essential carbon dioxide into our atmosphere. We currently have too much carbon dioxide, but we need small amounts for plants to photosynthesize.', 'While there is some notable skepticism of interstellar travel, a closer inspection shows that it is directed either at our near-term capabilities or at our achieving the kind of effortless space travel depicted in films like Star Wars or Star Trek , where individuals routinely travel between the stars in relative comfort. I share this skepticism. But the expansion of humanity’s potential doesn’t require anything like that. It requires only that if we could survive long enough, and strive hard enough, then we could eventually travel to a nearby star and establish enough of a foothold to create a new flourishing society from which we could venture further.', 'A B-47 bomber accidentally dropped a nuclear bomb over South Carolina, landing in someone’s garden and destroying their house. Fortunately, its atomic warhead was still in the plane.', '“technology changes exponentially, but social, economic, and legal systems change incrementally.”', 'Moreover, they would be extremely difficult to deflect as we would have less than a year from first detection (at around the orbit of Jupiter) to the time of impact', 'the possibility kept being rediscovered by younger scientists and that the leadership at Los Alamos had to keep “batting it down,” telling them that it had been taken care of.', 'We are living in a very different world since the explosion of the A-bomb. We have no way of knowing what the results will be, but there is the danger that much of our present civilization will come to an end… It might be advisable to select the printed material that would preserve the record of our civilization for the one we can hope will follow, microfilming it and making perhaps 10 copies and burying those in different places throughout the country. In that way we could ensure against the destruction that resulted from the fall of the Roman Empire.”', 'prepared a rough plan for microfilming the most important 500,000 volumes, or a total of 250 million pages. But in the end they did not pursue this, reasoning both that its becoming public would cause significant panic, and that written records would probably survive in the libraries of university towns that would not suffer direct hits from atomic weapons.', 'If a group cares deeply about the accuracy of their own internal work, they can set up a “red team” of researchers tasked with proving the work wrong. This team should be given ample time, until they overcome their initial loyalties to the work so far, beginning to hope it is wrong rather than right. They also should be given ample resources, praise and incentives for finding flaws.', 'One of the best methods for eliciting someone’s subjective probability for an event is to offer a series of small bets and see how extreme the odds need to be before they take them.', 'What emerges from these past records is evidence for rapid community turnover, migrations, development of novel ecosystems and thresholds from one stable ecosystem state to another, but there is very little evidence for broad-scale extinctions due to a warming world.', 'our inability to rule out that the biggest mass extinction was caused by rapid warming, are ultimately bad news.', 'This is a shockingly high estimate. The only other community of researchers I can imagine who may have estimated such a high probability of their work leading to catastrophically bad outcomes for humanity are the atomic scientists in the lead-up to the bomb. And yet I’m grateful to the researchers for their frank honesty about this.', 'IPCC, which uses such phrases instead of numerical probabilities in its reports.', 'My estimate of one in 10,000 per century is equivalent to a life expectancy of 1 million years.', 'There is also a question of cost-effectiveness. Space settlement does not look to me to be one of the most cost-effective ways to reduce risk over this century. As a simple example, building similar sustainable colonies in remote parts of the Earth (Antarctica, under the sea…) would be much cheaper and would protect against many of the same risks.', 'Depending on the details of how we define existential catastrophes, it may be possible to suffer two of them. For example, suppose that we lost 99% of our potential in an existential catastrophe. As I don’t require complete destruction of our potential in order to count as an existential risk, this would count. In the years that follow, it may still make sense to preserve the remaining 1% of our potential from further catastrophes. If our potential were truly vast to begin with, this 1% remaining may also be vast compared to the issues of the day that usually concern us, and the case for focusing on preserving our remaining potential may still be very strong.', 'For example, at the time of writing there have only been two published studies on the climate effects of full-scale nuclear war since the Cold War ended in 1991 (Robock, Oman & Stenchikov, 2007; and Coupe et al., 2019), and no detailed study of its agricultural effects since 1986 (Harwell & Hutchinson, 1986).']],'test_note3': [['What was the philosophy professor’s compelling insight? “Love conquers all.” James touches on the banality of these mystical insights: “ that deepened sense of the significance of a maxim or formula which occasionally sweeps over one. ‘I’ve heard that said all my life,’ we exclaim, ‘but I never realized its full meaning until now.’” The mystical journey seems to offer a graduate education in the obvious. Yet people come out of the experience understanding these platitudes in a new way; what was merely known is now felt, takes on the authority of a deeply rooted conviction. And, more often than not, that conviction concerns the supreme importance of love.', 'But the most prominent cover line was devoted to Wasson’s notorious article: “The Discovery of Mushrooms That Cause Strange Visions.”', 'FROM THE VANTAGE OF TODAY, it is hard to believe that psilocybin was introduced to the West by a vice president of J. P. Morgan in the pages of a mass-circulation magazine owned by Henry Luce; two more establishment characters it would be difficult to dream up', 'As it happened, the Time-Life founder and editor in chief, Henry Luce, along with his wife, Clare Boothe Luce, had personal knowledge of psychedelic drugs, and they shared the enthusiasm of the medical and cultural elites who had embraced them in the 1950s.', 'Before 1965, when a moral panic erupted over LSD, Time-Life publications were enthusiastic boosters of psychedelics, and Luce took a personal interest in directing his magazine’s coverage of them.', 'The headline is the first known reference to “magic mushrooms,” a phrase that, it turns out, was coined not by a stoned hippie but by a Time-Life headline writer.', 'During an afternoon stroll in the autumn woods, his bride, a Russian physician named Valentina, spotted a patch of wild mushrooms, before which “she knelt in poses of adoration.” Wasson knew nothing of “those putrid, treacherous excrescences” and was alarmed when Valentina proposed to cook them for dinner. He refused to partake. “Not long married,” Wasson wrote, “I thought to wake up the next morning a widower.”', 'The best account we have of the practice is that of the Spanish missionary priest Bernardino de Sahagún, who in the sixteenth century described the use of mushrooms in an Aztec religious observance: These they ate before dawn with honey, and they also drank cacao before dawn. The mushrooms they ate with honey when they began to get heated from them, they began to dance, and some sang, and some wept . . . Some cared not to sing, but would sit down in their rooms, and stayed there pensive-like. And some saw in a vision that they were dying, and they wept, and others saw in a vision that some wild beast was eating them, others saw in a vision that they were taking captives in war . . . others saw in a vision that they were to commit adultery and that their heads were to be bashed in therefor . . . Then when the drunkenness of the mushrooms had passed, they spoke one with another about the visions that they had seen.', 'It’s not hard to see why the church would have reacted so violently to the sacramental use of mushrooms. The Nahuatl word for the mushrooms—flesh of the gods—must have sounded to Spanish ears like a direct challenge to the Christian Sacrament, which of course was also understood to be the flesh of the gods, or rather of the one God. Yet the mushroom sacrament enjoyed an undeniable advantage over the Christian version. It took an act of faith to believe that eating the bread and wine of the Eucharist gave the worshipper access to the divine, an access that had to be mediated by a priest and the church liturgy. Compare that with the Aztec sacrament, a psychoactive mushroom that granted anyone who ate it direct, unmediated access to the divine—to visions of another world, a realm of the gods. So who had the more powerful sacrament? As a Mazatec Indian told Wasson, the mushrooms “ carry you there where god is.”', '“ Before Wasson nobody took the mushrooms only to find God. They were always taken for the sick to get well.”', 'In 1962, Hofmann joined Wasson on one of his return trips to Huautla, during which the chemist gave María Sabina psilocybin in pill form. She took two of the pills and declared they did indeed contain the spirit of the mushroom.', 'This last hypothesis about the invention of language turns on the concept of synesthesia, the conflation of the senses that psychedelics are known to induce: under the influence of psilocybin, numbers can take on colors, colors attach to sounds, and so on. Language, he contends, represents a special case of synesthesia, in which otherwise meaningless sounds become linked to concepts.', 'Eaten in small doses, psychedelic mushrooms might well increase fitness in animals, by increasing sensory acuity and possibly focus as well. A 2015 review article in the Journal of Ethnopharmacology reported that several tribes around the world feed psychoactive plants to their dogs in order to improve their hunting ability.', '“There had been forty thousand research participants and more than a thousand clinical papers! The American Psychiatric Association had whole meetings centered around LSD, this new wonder drug.” In fact, there were six international scientific meetings devoted to psychedelics between 1950 and 1965. “Some of the best minds in psychiatry had seriously studied these compounds in therapeutic models, with government funding.”', 'Hoping someone somewhere would hit upon a commercial application for its spookily powerful new compound, Sandoz offered to supply, free of charge, however much LSD any researcher requested. The company defined the term “researcher” liberally enough to include any therapist who promised to write up his or her clinical observations. This policy remained more or less unchanged from 1949 to 1966 and was in large part responsible for setting off the first wave of psychedelic research—the one that crashed in 1966, when Sandoz, alarmed at the controversy that had erupted around its experimental drug, abruptly withdrew Delysid from circulation.', 'As the literary theorists would say, the psychedelic experience is highly “constructed.” If you are told you will have a spiritual experience, chances are pretty good that you will, and, likewise, if you are told the drug may drive you temporarily insane, or acquaint you with the collective unconscious, or help you access “cosmic consciousness,” or revisit the trauma of your birth, you stand a good chance of having exactly that kind of experience.', 'That of course meant taking the drug themselves, which seems odd, even scandalous, to us today. But in the years before 1962, when Congress passed a law giving the FDA authority to regulate new “investigational” drugs, this was in fact common practice. Indeed, it was considered the ethical thing to do, for to not take the drug yourself was tantamount to treating your patients as guinea pigs.', 'The idea that an LSD experience could mimic the DTs “ seemed so bizarre that we laughed uproariously,” Hoffer recalled years later. “But when our laughter subsided, the question seemed less comical and we formed our hypothesis . . . : would a controlled LSD-produced delirium help alcoholics stay sober?”', 'There was no point in trying to get inside the mind; it was, in B. F. Skinner’s famous phrase, “a black box.” Instead, you measured what you could measure, which was outward behavior. The work with psychedelics would eventually spark a revival of interest in the subjective dimensions of the mind—in consciousness. How ironic that it took, of all things, a chemical—LSD-25—to bring interiority back into psychology', 'Hoping to isolate the effects of the drug from all other variables, clinicians administered LSD to alcoholics in neutral rooms and under instructions not to engage with them during their trips, except to administer an extensive questionnaire. The volunteers were then put in constraints or blindfolded, or both.', 'Few members of AA realize that the whole idea of a spiritual awakening leading one to surrender to a “higher power”—a cornerstone of Alcoholics Anonymous—can be traced to a psychedelic drug trip.', 'Cohen came to think of it instead as something he called “unsanity”: “a state beyond the control of the ego.”', 'Anaïs Nin, Jack Nicholson, Stanley Kubrick, André Previn, James Coburn, and the beat comedian Lord Buckley all underwent LSD therapy, many of them on the couch of Oscar Janiger.', '“Psychiatrists called, complaining that their patients were now begging them for LSD.”', '“ any explanation of the patient’s problems, if firmly believed by both the therapist and the patient, constitutes insight or is useful as insight.” Yet he qualified this perspective by acknowledging it was “nihilistic,” which, scientifically speaking, it surely was.', 'There, he called it “ therapy by self-transcendence,” suggesting he saw a role in Western medicine for what would come to be called applied mysticism.', 'He believed in working from the top down and disdained other psychedelic evangelists, like Timothy Leary, who took a more democratic approach. Members of Parliament, officials of the Roman Catholic Church,* Hollywood actors, government officials, prominent writers and philosophers, university officials, computer engineers, and prominent businessmen were all introduced to LSD as part of Hubbard’s mission to shift the course of history from above.', 'The engineers were getting religion. (And have it still: I know of one Bay Area tech company today that uses psychedelics in its management training. A handful of others have instituted “microdosing Fridays.”)', 'But it wasn’t all sweetness and light: several clients abruptly broke off marriages after their sessions, now believing they were mismatched or trapped in destructive patterns of behavior.', 'Schwartz said that several of the early computer engineers relied on LSD in designing circuit chips, especially in the years before they could be designed on computers. “You had to be able to visualize a staggering complexity in three dimensions, hold it all in your head. They found that LSD could help.”', '“I have no doubt that all that Hubbard LSD all of us had taken had a big effect on the birth of Silicon Valley.”', 'Brand thinks LSD’s value to his community was as an instigator of creativity, one that first helped bring the power of networked computers to people (via SRI computer visionaries such as Doug Engelbart and the early hacker community), but then was superseded by the computers themselves. (“At a certain point, the drugs weren’t getting any better,” Brand said, “but the computers were.”)', 'On occasion, the LSD produced genuine insight, as it did for Brand himself one chilly afternoon in the spring of 1966. Bored, he went up onto the roof of his building in North Beach and took a hundred micrograms of acid—Fadiman’s creativity dose. As he looked toward downtown while wrapped in a blanket, it appeared that the streets lined with buildings were not quite parallel. This must be due to the curvature of Earth, Brand decided. It occurred to him that when we think of Earth as flat, as we usually do, we assume it is infinite, and we treat its resources that way. “The relationship to infinity is to use it up,” he thought, “but a round earth was a finite spaceship you had to manage carefully.” At least that’s how it appeared to him that afternoon, “from three stories and one hundred mikes up.” It would change everything if he could convey this to people! But how? He flashed on the space program and wondered, “Why haven’t we seen a picture of the earth from space? I become fixed on this, on how to get this photo that would revolutionize our understanding of our place in the universe. I know, I’ll make a button! But what should it say? ‘Let’s have a photo of the earth from space.’ No, it needs to be a question, and maybe a little paranoid—draw on that American resource. ‘Why haven’t we seen a photograph of the whole earth yet?’” Brand came down from his roof and launched a campaign that eventually reached the halls of Congress and NASA. Who knows if it was the direct result of Brand’s campaign, but two years later, in 1968, the Apollo astronauts turned their cameras around and gave us the first photograph of Earth from the moon, and Stewart Brand gave us the first edition of the Whole Earth Catalog. Did everything change? The case could be made that it had.', '(It is one of the many paradoxes of psychedelics that these drugs can sponsor an ego-dissolving experience that in some people quickly leads to massive ego inflation. Having been let in on a great secret of the universe, the recipient of this knowledge is bound to feel special, chosen for great things.)', '“ Psychedelic drugs opened to mass tourism mental territories previously explored only by small parties of particularly intrepid adventurers, mainly religious mystics.”', '“ He blew in with that uniform,” Leary recalled, “laying down the most incredible atmosphere of mystery and flamboyance, and really impressive bullshit!”—a subject on which Leary was certainly qualified to judge. Hubbard “started name-dropping like you wouldn’t believe . . . claimed he was friends with the Pope.', 'So young Ronnie went to the dean and, when asked if he had taken drugs from Dr. Alpert, confessed, adding an unexpected fillip: “ Yes, sir, I did. And it was the most educational experience I’ve had at Harvard.”', '“I would examine the patient, determine it was a panic reaction, and then tell him or her, ‘Will you excuse me for a moment? There’s someone in the next room who has a serious problem.’ They would immediately begin to feel much better.”', 'So perhaps Leary’s real sin was to have the courage of his convictions—his and everyone else’s in the psychedelic research community. It’s often said that a political scandal is what happens when someone in power inadvertently speaks the truth. Leary was all too often willing to say out loud to anyone in earshot what everyone else believed but knew better than to speak or write about candidly. It was one thing to use these drugs to treat the ill and maladjusted—society will indulge any effort to help the wayward individual conform to its norms—but it is quite another to use them to treat society itself as if it were sick and to turn the ostensibly healthy into wayward individuals.', 'LSD truly was an acid, dissolving almost everything with which it came into contact, beginning with the hierarchies of the mind (the superego, ego, and unconscious) and going on from there to society’s various structures of authority and then to lines of every imaginable kind: between patient and therapist, research and recreation, sickness and health, self and other, subject and object, the spiritual and the material.', 'Normally, rites of passage help knit societies together as the young cross over hurdles and through gates erected and maintained by their elders, coming out on the other side to take their place in the community of adults. Not so with the psychedelic journey in the 1960s, which at its conclusion dropped its young travelers onto a psychic landscape unrecognizable to their parents. That this won’t ever happen again is reason to hope that the next chapter in psychedelic history won’t be quite so divisive.', 'looking distinctly uncomfortable, Captain Al Hubbard. He’s seventy-seven (or eight), and he’s traveled from Casa Grande, Arizona, where he lives in a trailer park.', 'Englishman, his teeth now in full revolt', '“Guidelines for Voyagers and Guides.”', 'Before my journeys, words and phrases such as these left me cold; they seemed utterly opaque, so much quasi-religious mumbo jumbo. Now they paint a recognizable reality. Likewise, certain mystical passages from literature that once seemed so overstated and abstract that I read them indulgently (if at all), now I can read as a subspecies of journalism.', 'Normal waking consciousness feels perfectly transparent, and yet it is less a window on reality than the product of our imaginations—a kind of controlled hallucination.', 'As a psychonaut acquaintance put it to me, “If it were possible to temporarily experience another person’s mental state, my guess is that it would feel more like a psychedelic state than a ‘normal’ state, because of its massive disparity with whatever mental state is habitual with you.”', '“That’s the brain doing what the brain does”—that is, working to reduce uncertainty by, in effect, telling itself stories.', 'For Carhart-Harris, the pinnacle of human development is the achievement of this differentiated self, or ego, and its imposition of order on the anarchy of a primitive mind buffeted by fears and wishes and given to various forms of magical thinking. While he holds with Aldous Huxley that psychedelics throw open the doors of perception, he does not agree that everything that comes through that opening—including the “Mind at Large” that Huxley glimpsed—is necessarily real. “The psychedelic experience can yield a lot of fool’s gold,” he told me.', 'In The Philosophical Baby, Gopnik draws a useful distinction between the “spotlight consciousness” of adults and the “lantern consciousness” of young children. The first mode gives adults the ability to narrowly focus attention on a goal. (In his own remarks, Carhart-Harris called this “ego consciousness” or “consciousness with a point.”) In the second mode—lantern consciousness—attention is more widely diffused, allowing the child to take in information from virtually anywhere in her field of awareness, which is quite wide, wider than that of most adults. (By this measure, children are more conscious than adults, rather than less.)', 'It also has a great many more neural connections than the adult brain. (During the panel, Carhart-Harris showed his map of the mind on psilocybin, with its dense forest of lines connecting every region to every other.) But as we reach adolescence, most of those connections get pruned, so that the “human brain becomes a lean, mean acting machine.” A key element of that developmental process is the suppression of entropy, with all of its implications, both good and bad. The system cools, and hot searches become the exception rather than the rule. The default mode network comes online.', '“The short summary is, babies and children are basically tripping all the time.”', 'For the well, psychedelics, by introducing more noise or entropy into the brain, might shake people out of their usual patterns of thought—“lubricate cognition,” in Carhart-Harris’s words—in ways that might enhance well-being, make us more open and boost creativity.', 'As one lifetime smoker put it to me in terms so simple I found it hard to believe, “Smoking became irrelevant, so I stopped.”', 'In taking people safely through the liminal state psychedelics occasion, with its radical suggestibility, Johnson acknowledges that the doctors and researchers “play the same role as shamans or elders. “Whatever we’re delving into here, it’s in the same realm as the placebo. But a placebo on rocket boosters.”', '“ The sheen and shine that life and existence had regained immediately after the trial and for several weeks after gradually faded,” he wrote one year later. “The insights I gained during the trial have never left and will never leave me. But they now feel more like ideas,” he says. He says he’s doing better than before and has been able to hold down a job, but his depression has returned. He told me he wishes he could have another psilocybin session at Imperial. Because that’s currently not an option, he’ll sometimes meditate and listen to the playlist from his session.', '“ Depression is a response to past loss, and anxiety is a response to future loss.” Both reflect a mind mired in rumination, one dwelling on the past, the other worrying about the future. What mainly distinguishes the two disorders is their tense.', '“Think of the brain as a hill covered in snow, and thoughts as sleds gliding down that hill. As one sled after another goes down the hill, a small number of main trails will appear in the snow. And every time a new sled goes down, it will be drawn into the preexisting trails, almost like a magnet.”', '“In time, it becomes more and more difficult to glide down the hill on any other path or in a different direction. “Think of psychedelics as temporarily flattening the snow. The deeply worn trails disappear, and suddenly the sled can go in other directions, exploring new landscapes and, literally, creating new pathways.”', 'On another return trip, Wasson was joined by James Moore, who had introduced himself as a chemist for a pharmaceutical company. But Moore was really a CIA agent eager to obtain psilocybin for the agency’s own psychedelic research program, MK-Ultra.', 'Wasson was halfhearted in his desire to protect María Sabina’s identity. The same week that the Life article appeared, he self-published a book, Mushrooms, Russia, and History', '“When my husband and I want to take a trip together,” says the psychedelic mother of four, “I just put a little acid in the kids’ orange juice in the morning and let them spend the day freaking out in the woods.”'], [['And third, that consciousness is a property of the universe, not brains. On this question, he holds with Henri Bergson, the French philosopher, who conceived of the human mind as a kind of radio receiver, able to tune in to frequencies of energy and information that exist outside it. “If you wanted to find the blonde who delivered the news last night,” Richards offered by way of an analogy, “you wouldn’t look for her in the TV set.”'], ['Rather than shut down all research, as many in the psychedelic community believe happened, the government simply made it more difficult to get approvals, and funding gradually dried up. As time went on, researchers found that on top of all the bureaucratic and financial hurdles they also had to deal with “the snicker test”: How would your colleagues react when you told them you were running experiments with LSD? By the mid-1970s, psychedelics had become something of a scientific embarrassment—not because they were a failure, but because they had become identified with the counterculture and with disgraced scientists such as Timothy Leary.'], ['Stanislav Grof believes that psychedelics loosed “the Dionysian element” on 1960s America, posing a threat to the country’s puritan values that was bound to be repulsed. (He told me he also thinks the same thing could happen again.)'], ['“That says something important about how reluctant cultures are to expose themselves to the changes these kinds of compounds can occasion,”'], ['In 1975, the Rockefeller Commission investigating the CIA disclosed that the agency had also been running LSD experiments in Maryland, at Fort Detrick, as part of a mind-control project called MK-Ultra. ( An internal memo the commission released concisely set forth the agency’s objective: “Can we get control of an individual to the point where he will do our bidding against his will and even against fundamental laws of nature, such as self-preservation?”) It was revealed that the CIA was dosing both government employees and civilians without their knowledge; at least one person had died.'], ['the first wave of psychedelic research, promising as it was, would end for reasons having nothing to do with science.'], ['Can you think of another area of science thought to be so dangerous and taboo that all research gets shut down for decades? It’s unprecedented in modern science.'], ['“This guy is lying on the couch right there where you are, with tears streaming down his face, and I’m thinking, how absolutely beautiful and meaningful this experience is. How sacred. How can this ever have been illegal? It’s as if we made entering Gothic cathedrals illegal, or museums, or sunsets!'], ['University research with entheogens (roughly, God-evoking substances such as peyote and sacred mushrooms) has returned. The field of study includes pharmacology, psychology, creativity enhancement, and spirituality. To explore the possibility of participating in confidential entheogen research projects, call 1-888-585-8870, toll free. www.csp.org.'], ['I felt as if I had been repeatedly sucked into the asshole of God. Boothby had what sounds very much like a classic mystical experience, though he may be the first in the long line of Western mystics to enter the divine realm through that particular aperture.'], ['phase 2 trial, involving 180 volunteers, which Bogenschutz is now conducting at NYU in collaboration with Stephen Ross and Jeffrey Guss.']], ['sacrament', 'hoary', 'platitude', 'preposterous', 'unencumbered', 'superfluous', 'incongruously', 'exuberance', 'WATERSHED', 'serendipitous', 'vacuous', 'meticulous', 'preternaturally', 'balmy', 'poignance', 'Perennial', 'elusive', 'indelible', 'foundered', 'inadvertently', 'incessantly', 'auspicious', 'surfeit', 'abeyance', 'verisimilitude', 'impetuousness', 'overzealousness', 'rumination']]}